### We all wanna change the world

Reading Ian MacDonald's *Revolution In The Head* is like reading a history of Beatles musical
criticism. It has been the most up-to-date synthesis of many Beatles critical sources, particularly
Lewisohn's exhaustive recording history and has a unique comparative cultural timeline of their
impact, but it is beginning to date. This aspect of the book is probably most useful to a non-fan.
The great problem of making any appraisal of the Beatles, either as musicians or as cultural
participants, is how to be properly objective.  McDonald is bluntly honest, beginning with the
premise that objectivity is impossible until possibly a century into the future. He undoes his
premise by attempting to obscure his own biases. As any Beatles fan will tell you, there are good
Beatles songs and (because fans are loathe to say the word bad) *not-so-good* Beatles songs.  Which
songs fall into the *not-so-good* category says as much about the fan as the band; this is, after
all, a conversation.  McDonald-as-critic tries to objectify the taste of McDonald-as-fan by putting
forward a curious argument: that *random* is the cause of bad music today and the Beatles music
became *randomly* bad.  He may well be right that the Beatles mirrored a change in the Western
zeitgeist, but if he disagrees with that zeitgeist in important respects he is also at odds with his
chosen metaphor.  This tension undoes his plan and derails his work.

Another requirement of criticism, is to frame the subject in a new way: MacDonald's most important
contribution to this is restoring the Beatles to the context of their contemporaries. But again, he
undermines this achievement by falling back on some hackneyed journalistic devices common to Beatles
criticism: by measuring their creativity in terms of their maturity (the "they grew up" excuse, used
for everything from their later music to their break-up and post-Beatles careers). Perhaps more
unfortunately, he also falls into that habit of describing their career as an arc, an inevitable up
and down. He forgets, as we often do, that while *we* maybe looking back, *they* were looking
forward, and it requires an appreciation of their perspective as much as our own. His disappointment
with the present taints his analysis of the past.

As time passes, more memoirs are written. Probably the most important is Geoff Emerick's *Here, There
and Everywhere* (2006). Of course he adds his own interpretations, but it's no less valuable in
light of some of MacDonald's pronouncements.

### You tell me it's the institution

According to his obituaries, MacDonald was a pivotal figure in the musical criticism of the 1970's.
Several reviews accused him of having measured everything by the bar of the 1960's; not everyone
agrees with his cultural conclusions. The criticism is not entirely fair: he makes many positive
comparisons, primarily using David Bowie as a model, to which I'll come back later. One of his
gripes with the 1970's is the rise of the stadium rock group, the corporate response to the power of
the rock dollar. There is also his distaste for modern dance music and the way computers have
changed the way music is made.

In summary, the contemporary critics complaints against the book are: too much technical analysis,
obscure criticism of minor details, and over-strenuous attempts to appear objective in order to find
fault. As one review puts it: 

<blockquote> What he fails to understand is that the best criticism of pop
music succeeds because it recognizes it's own inherent prejudice and presents
itself with the irreverence and humour that such a recognition involves.'
</blockquote>

which is a nice way of saying that McDonald is not only biased, but humourless about it. MacDonald
makes his remarks applicable within the strictly chronological sequence of recordings, allowing him
to cover, for instance, the direction of an albums sessions, or (as we'll see) continue a series of
pronouncements on a Beatles character. The problems begin with his musical analysis; meant to help
objectify his criticism, it descends into mere opinion as the book progresses. For instance,
beginning with the early songs, the music is often measured on the depth of its progressive or
harmonic "surprise". As the song list continues you sense its only the surprise he values, but this
then transforms into the increasingly strident tone about *random*. This has its basis in the change
of composing and recording methods post-touring but is also a theme in later chapters where some
songs are literally dismissed based on their degree of *random*. He begins by using musicological
terms to describe early Beatles songs, but as the book progresses, this analysis often gives way to
an emphasis on the production and composition of the songs rather than their musical content. At
times he uses musicological analysis to attack the composer, particularly in George Harrison's case
(cf. [136], *While My Guitar Gently Weeps*, pp300-301 and [U138], *Not Guilty*, pp304-305)

### You'd better free your mind instead

Typical of the problems with the book is the way MacDonald reviews John Lennon. Like many before
him, he falls into the trap of writing as if he knows the Beatles personally. He begins to pronounce
judgement on Lennon's drug-taking; it seems partly an explanation of his approach to Lennon's songs
and as a negative contrast to what was undoubtedly a purple patch for McCartney. It also appears
that his disappointment with Lennon the solo artist gets 'worked back' into Beatle compositions. The
review for [123] *Across The Universe* has been noted by many as a failure to grasp the nature of
the song (he praises the drone of [77] *Tomorrow Never Knows* yet *Across The Universe* has the same
pedigree) and ends with a curt dismissal of this 'boring' song, in a manner that implies that Lennon
was frequently boring post-Beatles. In my opinion the nadir of the book is [165] *The Long and
Winding Road*. In full swing against Lennon, MacDonald actually accuses him of sabotaging the basic
track, based on the original demo from *Anthology 3* and claims that Spector has covered up Lennon's
mistakes on bass by drowning them out. MacDonald justifies this amazing charge by the claim that
Lennon and Spector mastered the album without McCartney's consent, thus McCartney was "unable to fix
it".  When you compare the *Anthology 3* track with the *Let It Be* version and the *Let It Be
Naked* version, several things become apparent. According to an article on <a
href="http://mixonline.com/recording/interviews/audio_naked_truth_beatles/">Mixonline</a> the
*Naked* version is in fact a later take: significantly, Lennon also plays bass on it. MacDonald in
his fulminations never directly refers to this 31st January take (the day after the famous rooftop
concert), so it is unclear whether his argument is really about preferring a worse version, as the
comparison between the *Anthology* version and the *Naked* version (which can now be done by anyone)
reveals not much difference at all. So it's odd, then, that he never applies it to *Let It Be*
itself, on which Lennon also played bass *on the same Jan 31 session* to which MacDonald refers, nor
does MacDonald acknowledge how relatively rare it was for Lennon to play bass at all (Harrison is
much more in evidence on Beatles records as a stand-in bass player), and that these demos were made
within the context of the long Get Back sessions. And beyond that, MacDonald's charge ignores the
wide selection of mistakes, dodgy edits and adlibs throughout the Beatles recorded history, to
which he refers more than once. A brief trawl through the excellent resource offered by
<a href="http://wgo.signal11.org.uk/wgo.htm">The Beatles Anomalies List</a> is evidence enough, but
Emerick's memoir confirms that playing with "duff" notes on a session was a Beatles *game*, not a
crime.

So, a take never meant to be released and possibly preferred to a superior take was instead released
with extra production and that is sabotage according to MacDonald. And all of this beside the simple
fact that *all Beatles approved the mix*. To quote Peter Doggett, author of *You Never Give Me Your
Money* from his <a
href="http://peterdoggettbeatles.blogspot.com/2010/09/phil-spector-and-let-it-be.html"> blog</a>:

>And it was Klein who suggested that Phil Spector, who had just produced John
>Lennon's 'Instant Karma' single in magnificent style, should be asked to go back through the January
>1969 tapes, and assemble a suitable soundtrack album for the movie. Despite what you've read
>elsewhere, all four Beatles authorised that decision.
>
>Spector set to work, mixing here, snipping tape there, and ultimately recruiting both Ringo
>Starr and an orchestra to work on several tracks - including McCartney's song, 'The Long And Winding
>Road'. Why wasn't Paul there at the session? Because both he and John were so sick of the project
>that they had agreed to let George and Ringo supervise what Spector was doing. So it's true that
>Paul McCartney didn't know what Phil Spector was planning to do to 'The Long And Winding Road' (i.e.
>add an orchestra and choir); but only because he had chosen not to get involved.
>
>When Spector's work was done, he rapidly assembled his mix of the Let It Be album, cut four
>acetate copies of the LP, and sent one apiece to each of the Beatles for their approval. The four
>musicians liaised with each other, and approved Spector's work. Only two weeks later, when the
>presses were already rolling, did Paul suddenly wake up and think, "Hang on a minute, I want to make
>some changes". But by then it was too late.
>
>During the research for my book, I came across the original letter that Spector sent to the four
>Beatles. Rather than the authoritarian rant I was expecting, his note turned out to be extremely
>friendly. *If there is anything you'd like done to the album, let me know and I'll be glad to help*,
>he wrote.  *Naturally little things are easy to change, big things might be a problem. If you wish,
>please call me about anything regarding the album tonight.* That's definitely the voice of
>compromise, rather than a control freak.

Again, Emerick's memoir bears out this version of Spector's approach. But as a review of *Naked*
plaintively asked, if the intention was to "fix" the record, why didn't they? Astonishingly, it is
yet unfinished, as now we have McCartney's version, arguably no less biased than Spector's. The
original album as prepared by Glyn Johns has never been released, its rejection (again, by all four
Beatles) the catalyst for Spector's work.  Remember too, it was originally a soundtrack album, (the
point of having the rooftop concert at all) and ironically many of the preferred takes for *Naked*
are rooftop performances.

Despite this, *Revolution In The Head* goes some way to redressing the critical balance between
Lennonism and McCartneyism. Yet MacDonald still fails to be objective because he robs John to pay
Paul. We still need a critical view that goes beyond this tired dualism. I have not read the earlier
editions so I cannot judge properly, but MacDonald does acknowledge that this edition was updated to
reflect McCartney's book with Barry Miles. It seems a slender support for such arguments, given
McCartney's own biases. Of course, that dualism ignores Harrison's contributions about which
McDonald is often scathing, as mentioned already. In most cases, if it's not Indian-influenced,
McDonald hates it. [66] *If I Needed Someone* sums up his attitude:


<blockquote markdown="1">
Like so many Harrison songs, *If I Needed Someone* has an
obstinate quality which, combined with his preferences for aloof sentiments
and dour progressions, renders it gauche beside McCartney's urbanity and
anaemic next to the boldness of Lennon.
</blockquote>

MacDonald characterizes Harrison as obstinate to an absurd degree; he is written off as a kind of
grumpy third wheel to the Partnership. This is unfortunately in line with most Beatles criticism.
*Reticent* is probably a more apt description of Harrison; while he freely discussed other aspects
of the Beatles, his real thoughts on the Partnership were never drawn out to my knowledge outside of
an understandable competitive envy, but also (often forgotten) a self-deprecating humour. 

Harrison's recollections (as naturally subjective as they are) are a vital foil to the Partnership
party line, and I find it significant that MacDonald ignores important contributions in this
respect. Of course, McCartney's explorations into experimental music shouldn't be discounted. But
Harrison rightly pointed out that the combination of McCartney's experiments and his own disinterest
as much as Lennon's withdrawal was what started the rot. Put simply, the Beatles were *tired*
after years of frenetic touring.

### We'd all love to change our head

In several parts of the book it seems as if different Ian MacDonalds are at work: alternately
praising and blaming the Beatles for his inspiration or frustration. His critical process seems to
have broken down at the analysis of later Beatles material, and it is here that he begins to use
biographical criticism instead of the more straightforward entries for the earlier albums.  Most
importantly, he begins to take issue with their very compositional methods, which seems rather
high-handed. 

The turning point for MacDonald, as with so many critics, seems to be *Sgt Peppers*. MacDonald
literally begins Part 3 *Coming Down* after this album, in his eyes the Beatles last great work.
After that he begins to struggle with his material. [107] *With A Little Help From My Friends*
describes the songwriting process at its most benign. Yet like many song reviews, the sting is in
the tail, where he dismisses later work as self-indulgent. He may have more of a point that the
production process got less concise but once again this is an easy judgement to make from this
distance. What characterized the Beatles was the attempt to avoid repeating themselves, as much in
production as in songwriting, a fact he acknowledges in [107] but seems reluctant to take into
account later. The experimental aspect has MacDonald particularly worried: the released material he
dislikes tend to fit his preconception that they were merely "tossed off" as part of a misguided
pursuit of *random*.  This conveniently forgets the throwaway nature of most pop/rock to begin with,
but also the simple fact that many Beatles songs *were* written in 5 minutes, however laboriously
produced later. His reviews of [113] *It's All Too Much* and [114] *All You Need Is Love* oscillate
between condemnation of the Beatles musical methods and the need to explain the cultural moment.
They are either too comfortable and sloppy or transcendental and experimental.

It's interesting to compare Geoff Emericks memoir at this point; for he has a similar story of
disappointment with the Beatles' direction after Pepper. As he acknowledges, Abbey Road was a
terrible place to be creative in, both for its culture and its environment, and Emerick has similar
issues with it and his personal involvement with the Beatles.

It is almost impossible to avoid making biographical judgements here: perhaps a better approach would
involve an acknowledgement that the Beatles felt trapped by their fame and the necessity of artistic
development, keeping in mind that few at this stage of rock history were ever faced with such an
issue. Together with their belief in their abilities, this might have had an effect on their style
of songwriting (whatever you think of their quality). MacDonald decides instead to largely blame
Lennon and to some degree Harrison for this. But in fact, as we know, it is McCartney who begins to
unravel the bands recording relationship by using Abbey Road as his personal studio from the time of
*Sgt Pepper* onwards. The band were so huge that live performance was practically impossible and
they wanted to explore the use of multitracking itself as a compositional method. Much later in the
book, MacDonald introduces the chronology proper with a rant on modern recording techniques and
computer-aided composition. It is easy to miss its import until you notice how he preferences
particular issues of the Beatles recording career in the main chapters. The not-so-subtle inference
is that by being relatively backward in technology compared to American studios, Beatle records
gained by other forms of innovation (drum miking, ADT, etc). This may well have some truth in it; on
the other hand, the Beatles happily changed studios when an 8-track was available, and used new
technology like the Moog synthesizer. Although they were envious of American studio facilities they
never seriously considered recording in America, but nevertheless made noises about it.  So this
argument is merely self-serving, using the Beatles to confirm his bias. 

### You say you've got a real solution

MacDonald is perhaps at his most revealing when he makes comparisons. David Bowie, still a
controversial figure today, is used by MacDonald to contrast with the Beatles in several ways.
MacDonald thinks he mastered self-reinvention where they did not; but you could argue a similar case
with Elvis, which underlies how unfair that comparison is. He directly compares Bowie to Lennon as
an innovator, which jibes with his pronouncements on Lennon for well nigh half the book. His use of
cultural criticism to get around what can only be described as honest subjectivity (which MacDonald
is unable to acknowledge) reaches the stage where he flatly states that the Beatles became musically
vulnerable when they began addressing their culture instead of reflecting it, giving [125/132]
*Revolution* as the prime example. It was certainly a controversial song in its time, but whether
this gives MacDonald license to treat the surrounding oeuvre with the same attitude is moot. He
certainly uses *Revolution* to again characterize Lennon, but this time blaming him for an
inappropriate social conscience and getting a few digs in at Yoko Ono (he cites her as a *disturbing
influence* with throwaway comments about her political affiliations). There is also a long (and
winding) thread of blaming the Beatles and their love of *random*, on semi-crazed and actually
crazed interpretations of their music and lyrics. This idea is more or less identical to evangelical
Christianity's devotion to backwards masking and has as much validity. Making the Beatles
responsible for Charles Manson, MacDonald's critical integrity is lost, bringing his cultural thesis
into grave doubt. He simply does not address the sheer effect of their fame on themselves and others
in a reasonable way, and this failing comes back to haunt the review in important aspects. He is
very close to stating that the Beatles denouement was a failure of the culture itself; but I suspect
this is as much a lament for the succeeding fracture into musical subculture than recognizing that
the seeds of such a fracture existed well before the close of the decade. It conveniently sidesteps
the recognition that whatever opinions you can hold on the results of the Beatles personal fracture,
similar seeds were also always waiting for four young men too young to address such an unimaginable
response to their cultural input.

### You ask me for a contribution

MacDonald's complaint against current musical culture is irrelevant to most contemporary readers,
who are just as likely to be devoted to a musical subculture, or more properly, polyculture which
exists outside his narrow parameters of stadium band and dance genre. That's what puzzles me most
about MacDonald's attitudes to the variety of music the Beatles produced. To the best of their
ability, they tried *everything*. Some experiments worked, some didn't. Many of those experiments
were based on contemporary musical movements, some pushed far forward. But no one band, even the
polyglot Beatles, was going to hold all those movements in check. Sooner or later, they would become
cultural genres in their own right. And top 40 music is as irrelevant as it ever was - that
non-irrelevant music appears in the charts does not change the irrelevancy of charts themselves. What
of MacDonald's prediction in the preface to the second revised edition that Beatles lyrics will be
the Achilles heel of Beatle criticism? To the extent that they used contemporary language, this is
as unavoidable as understanding pop standards or folk music, which makes his argument moot. In any
case, so many popular musicians have used similar methods to write lyrical content that it isn't
just Beatles lyrics that will become opaque in a century, it's the cultural context itself. And to
me this is like blaming the Beatles for not being Shakespeare. Already, much jazz argot and the
standards jazz was based on is culturally redundant, yet MacDonald deliberately contrasts their
lyric style to Tin Pan Alley composers, and actually posits that they could have chosen to write
like them. He seems oblivious to the ironic treatment the Beatles gave the pop standards they chose
to cover as opposed to the sincerity with which they covered rock 'n roll. That they chose to use
their own voice, however casual and simple it appears, is the mark of their originality as much as
Dylan or Bowie or other contemporaries that MacDonald approves.



